# Analysis of Test Statistic to Detect Psychometric Dissociation

#### Authors: Giampino Alice, Nardelli Vincenzo and Piacenza Fabio
#### Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca
-----

## Abstract

This paper aims at studying the properties of a statistic which can be useful to detect the psychometric dissociation. In particular, a survey can be given to the patients, in order to evaluate possible a dissociation, intended as two functionalities in the brain, having a significantly different level of efficiency. Each survey assesses two different scores, related to these two functionalities in the brain. These scores are modelled through two random variables, having an unknown joint distribution. This bivariate random variable is compared with the corresponding results of a control group, related to healthy patients, which are supposed to follow a bivariate normal distribution, having the same variance-covariance matrix of evaluated patients. For each functionality of the brain, the standardized difference between the score of the evaluated patient and the sample mean of the control group is analyzed. The statistic of interest is defined as the difference between the two standardized differences related to the two brain functionalities. Its probability distribution is studied under the null hypothesis that the two standardized differences between the means for the two brain functionalities are equal. For sake of simplicity, the random variable of evaluated patients is initially supposed to follow a bivariate normal distribution, and then the initial results are generalized to the case where the normality is not assumed. The main result is that the statistic of interest converges to a normal probability distribution, which is the difference of two standard normal distributions, having mean equal to zero, and variance that depends on the correlation between them. The main issue is related to the denominator of the two quantities. Remarkably, the central problem is identified with a variances one.
